But the Odyssey first, good.
But secondly, nobody likes my Harrison Ford idea, but this is a kind of a rough and tough house solo, basically, isn't it?
Why couldn't it be Harrison Ford?
Well, I think it could.
I guess you just want somebody who... Well, it could be Harrison Ford.
If your flight is clean and you can do it.
And a pinch.
Okay.
Melinda, thank you.
Thank you, you're on it.
1-800-423-8255 is the connection phone.
The Odyssey connection, the Homer connection, the Robert Tagle translation connection.
Kirk is calling from Price Crossing, Massachusetts.
Good morning.
Chris, I'm with you on Harrison Ford, for one thing.
Okay.
Also, I think we're all tending to think of classical actors because of that language training.
I do think Kenneth Branagh would be good.
I was thinking of Kevin Kline, too.
I don't know if he has the... I don't know.
Something doesn't seem quite right about him.
How about Robert De Niro?
De Niro?
Well, he's too old, for one thing.
How old do we think he is?
That's a good question.
the beginning of the Odyssey, he's, I don't know, I'm thinking like 30-ish.
Maybe a little bit more.
He's been away for 20 years.
Telemachus is a, what?
Telemachus is probably late teens.
Okay.
At the earliest.
Really?
At the youngest.
Hard to say.
Comer doesn't specify it.
Leave it to our imagination.
I really do hope, um, that Ian McKellen's listening, though, and we'll produce this.
Me too.
I'm with you.
It would be wonderful.
Yes, you would.
I had, uh,
I have to tell you, I'm a high school theater and literature teacher, and I have to confess that I've never read the book, and I'm really getting tempted.
I'm not a book reader.
Well, I'm going to look into it.
Trip, you won't regret it.
Thank you.
Seriously, you'll say, you'll hit your head and you'll say, uh-huh.
Oh, yeah.
I'm really excited.
And keep in mind, too, that it is never too late.
As I say, it's a poem that will hit you at any age, any stage of your life.
I'm looking forward to it.
Good.
The winter before last, no, last winter, Kurt Vonnegut's play that was generated out of the story, Happy Birthday 1 to June, are you both familiar with that?
Yes, I am not.
Sorry.
Go ahead.
Well, as one of you, who, Chris, you're familiar with it?
No, I'm not.
Robert Bigel is a... I am somewhat.
Please tell us about your production.
Well...
I was very proud of my actors wrapping them around it and handling it.
It was written around 1970.
As a result, Vonnegut said that he was out in Cape Cod one summer with a book group reading The Odyssey, and he realized what a rat Odysseus is in some ways.
So we focused on the play as Harold Ryan, the great white hunter, sort of a Hemingway-esque figure, disappear for eight years.
He's a mercenary and hunter.
And then there's his wife, whose name still is Penelope, waiting for him.
Is she weaving?
Pardon?
No, she's not.
She has just become engaged to one of her two suitors.
And Harold comes back and shows up, and he's racist, sexist, egotistical, and...
I really like the play.
Vonnegut says in the introduction he never found the perfect ending for it, but I think it works really well.
Not with a marriage like that, no.
Right, right.
I never heard of it until about two years ago, and then I stumbled into it.
Great.
Thank you.
1-800-423-8255.
Robert Fagles is, I guess, the translator and the reviver of Homer in the 1990s.
He's being compared with Alexander Pope,
Chapman, Robert Fitzgerald.
It's only a handful.
I mean, there have been many, many translations of these books, many, God knows, schoolboy translations and mistranslations, but a handful of great ones.
And Robert Pagels has written both now.
The Iliad in 1970, the Odyssey, dressed out in book form and also in a 14-hour complete reading by
the great British Shakespearean actor Ian McKellen.
Give him a call at 1-800-423-8255.
We're talking about one of the essential characters of all Western literature and the most incredible story, more subplots, more small parts, in heaven and on earth, in the underground, on the ocean, than we can count.
We're going to talk a little bit about the story in general, the plots, the subplots, the women...
Calypso, Scylla, Charypters, the Sirens, the Cyclops.
What are your favorite episodes here?
This was, let's face it, made for an infinite television series.
Where would you begin?
What would your favorite episodes be?
This is a question to me.
Yes.
When I begin readings, I go to one of two places, and they're both in
books 9 through 12.
One is maybe the best-known episode, and that's The Blinding of the Cyclops, with his steak charred to red-hot.
Do you want to give it to us?
Well, it's a long passage, but I'll be happy to read The Blinding if you have the time.
Absolutely.
Are you sure?
Is this the first Cyclops?
Yes, this is the first Cyclops.
People refer to television as the Cyclops of our time.
We've got two and a half minutes before the break.
Can you give us the
A two-minute version?
Well, give me a try.
I'll see.
Odysseus had him drunk, blind drunk.
With that, he toppled over, sprawled full length, flat on his back, and lay there, his massive neck slumping to one side.
And sleep that conquers all overwhelmed him now, as wine came spurting, flooding up from his gullet with chunks of human flesh.
He vomited, blind drunk.
Now, at last, I thrust their stake in a bed of embers to get it red-hot, and rallied all my comrades.
Courage!
No panic now, no one bring back now.
And green as it was, just as the olive stake was about to catch fire, the glow terrific.
I dragged it from the flames, my men clustering round, as some god breathed enormous courage through us all.
Hoisting high that olive stake with its stabbing point, straight into the monster's eye they rammed it hard.
I drove my waiternet from above and boarded home, as a shipwright bores his beam with a shipwright's drill, that men below, whipping the strap back and forth, whirl, and the drill keeps twisting faster, never stopping.
So we seized our stake with its fiery tip and boarded round and round in the giant's eye, till blood came boiling up around that smoking shaft, and the hot blast singed his brow and eyelids round the core.
and the broiling eyeball burst.
The blinding of the Cyclops in the Odyssey.
Robert Fagel's reading from his own translation.
This part would be cut out by the V-chip on television.
Very bloody stuff, very bloody stuff.
And I was going to say that the only other episode I start with, unless we're heading out of time at this point, we'll come back to it, but go ahead.
All right, I will.
Is the opposite of that.
Odysseus is in the underworld.
He hasn't seen his mother for 20 years and assumes that she's still alive.
He goes to the underworld and finds her ghost, realizes that she is gone and is overwhelmed by it.
That's where I began to translate the Odyssey when my own mother died from 20 years ago, and I had been
first reading I translated.
Fathers, sons, mothers, wives, lovers, it's all in there.
We're talking about the Odyssey with the translator Robert Ago.
This is the connection.
Give the master translator a call at 1-800-423-TORP.
We'll be back after a very short break.
and this is the connection.
We're talking about the Odyssey, Homer's Odyssey, newly translated by the poet Robert Fagles.
As Gary Wills wrote in the New York Times Sunday Magazine last Sunday, we seem to be in the middle of a great classical revival when these ancient stories are made fresh.
Are you into it?
1-800-423-8255 makes the Odyssey connection.
Robert Fagles, I just wanted to say
Always stuck in my mind, there was a classics teacher at Yale who pointed out that if you take the name of Odysseus' son, Telemachus, and take the root of it, telemark, and translate that CH into a sort of aspiration,
Greek letter key, and spell it backwards, it comes out Hamlet.
Wonderful attitude.
And it tells you everything.
I mean, this is the troubled son.
He's beside himself with jealousy for his mother's virtue here.
Father's gone.
How did this happen?
What's he going to do?
He dithers and doubts very much exactly as Hamlet did.
There may or may not be an actual connection there.
But it's one of those things that makes you realize these are the stories of all time, and they come back and back and back and back in literature, in life.
I wanted you to sort of speculate, or maybe tell some of the stories in the book that simply won't die, that are just eternally human, or so we believe.
Well, you know you're right, there's no connection between Shakespeare and Homer, no actual connection, but there's a very deep one in terms of kindred spirits.
And they both seem to have written some of their very great work about a young prince, deprived of a father, in an irritating relationship with his mother, surrounded by a world they cannot fathom, cannot make any sense of.
And all of a sudden, impulse comes, and the person of Hamlet's ghost, or Hamlet the father's ghost,
In the person of Athena disguised as one of Telemachus' father's old friends.
And it's in many ways a bolt from the blue, Athena, who comes down and urges him to be on his way out of Ithaca to look for news of his father.
And yet Athena to the Greeks always means some inner impulse too.
There's something on his mind that says, I have to find out about my father.
I may have to go abroad.
I want to see my father's old friends who fought with him at Troy.
learn those stories absorb those stories and if i absorb them deeply enough i may begin to re-embody them i may begin to do what hamlet does i may begin to come of age and that's why the telemica story i think one of the reasons why it haunts and stalks us so it is the great story of the adolescent becoming of age becoming his father's son in fact so much so that even today he can
battle with the suitors.
We've also said, though, it's a woman's book in many ways.
Give us the Penelope treatment here.
The Penelope treatment is, well, Penelope is, she is all women, as Odysseus is probably all men.
She's the creature of privacy, of introspection, of dreams, of recrimination.
She's at the same time a wonderful and wily partner as her husband, um,
Weaves plots, so she weaves webs.
And between the two of them, there's a kind of unspoken but very rich complicity, man and woman, working together, first to defeat their mutual enemies, and then finally to reunite themselves and reestablish a dynasty.
You're a remarkable man.
1-800-423-8255 makes the Odyssey connection with the translator Robert Fagel's 1-800-423-TALK.
Edward is on a car phone in Boston.
Yes, Chris.
Good morning, Edward.
Good morning.
You're a Boston treasurer.
I agree.
I was hoping that your guest might recount the tale of Odysseus' dog.
Oh, this is wonderful.
I wish I had the time to read it.
Well, I mean, that's when he gives the dog a charge when he leaves and when he comes back in disguise and the reaction of the dog.
It's a great story.
There's a dog part in this movie.
Tell us about that.
Toto.
Lashy.
Tell us the dog story.
And, Edward, thank you very much for cuing it.
One of the problems for Odysseus is to make himself known in his own palace world to people whom he really trusts.
person, if you can put it that way, who recognizes Odysseus, is his dog.
His dog senses exactly who is here.
And he keeps his muzzle low and he thumps his tail, but he's too weak and neglected, half dead from neglect, as Homer says, to drag himself an inch toward his master.
And it brings tears to Odysseus' eyes, and Odysseus doesn't cry very often.
He flicks away that tear and he says to Eumaeus, the pig keeper, who still doesn't recognize the master, that this was a beautiful dog.
He had all the lines, but Odysseus can't tell if he really had the speed to match his looks.
Eumaeus reassures him he had the speed, the form, the flare.
He was the great hunter.
He was his master's dog, until his master had to go to Troy, and then he got no joy in him.
This, the dog has been waiting 20 years to sense and hear.
20 years.
It's a great tear-jerker to the scene.
It's also a test of Odysseus's iron self-control as well in the face of an overwhelming situation.
Thanks for asking.
Thanks for that answer, my lord.
An epic for animal lovers.
For dog lovers.
He's back after 20 years.
His son doesn't know him.
His father doesn't know him.
His wife doesn't know him.
There's also the marvelous story of the dead.
I mean, eventually, the dog recognizes him.
He's identifiable also by scars from a boar's tusk.
But then there's the bed trick.
Do you want to give that marvelous little bit of plotting?
Penelope is just like Odysseus.
They're forever testing, testing people around them, testing themselves, testing each other before they can really remarry, if you can put it that way.
And Odysseus is just on the edge of being recognized by Penelope when Penelope acquires Leel from the test and says to the stranger, he's calling the stranger, spend the night, if you will, and we'll make you a bed, and she tells the handmaid,
to drag their favorite bed out of the bedchamber and prepare it for them.
This creates enormous fleshing anger in Odysseus.
He built that bed out of an olive trunk and he knows it and knows that no one could possibly move it.
Something must be wrong.
In reciting this history of the bed, what might be wrong, he reveals himself.
This is the ultimate proof.
And at that, Penelope's heart surrenders.
And they are together, significantly enough, over the great ancestral bed that he built for the two of them.
The very proof, the sign of their marriage, the hallmark of their marriage.
Had to be him.
No one else would know.
That's such a marvelous thing, and it leads to the reconciliation of Ulysses and Penelope as read by Ian McKellen.
Can we just cue the Ian McKellen reading of exactly that?
He wept to see how the wife he loved, the soul of loyalty in his arms at last.
Joy...
Warm as the joy that shipwrecked sailors feel when they catch sight of land, Poseidon has struck their well-rigged ship on the open sea with gale winds and crushing walls of waves, and only a few escape, swimming, struggling out of the frothing surf to reach the shore, their bodies crusted with salt but buoyed up with joy as they plant their feet on solid ground again, spared their deadly fate.
So joyous now to fear the sight of her husband, vivid in her gaze, that her white arms embracing his neck would never for a moment let him go.
Ian McKellen reading Robert Fagel's translation of, in the next to last book of the Odyssey.
Our guest is the master translator Robert Fagel's
of the Iliad and now the Odyssey.
It will call it 1-800-423-8255.
Jonathan is on the line from Newton, Massachusetts.
Hello, Professor Fegels.
Jonathan Shea.
Oh, hi, Jonathan Shea.
I admire your work so much.
Well, you're very kind.
What is your work, Jonathan?
Sorry?
What is your work?
I wrote a book called Achilles in Vietnam, Combat, Trauma, and the Undoing of Character.
A revelation.
Yeah, a very important book, Jonathan.
Thanks for calling.
Well, I greatly admire your work, and I want to point out to your audience that
Homer is enormously truthful in portraying the character of the beaten up, beaten down old soldier who is trying to return to civilian life.
Yes.
He is obsessed with cunning.
He is obsessed with protecting himself from other people's cunning.
And in the clinic, I encounter this every single day.
I see.
And I hope that's the subject of your next book.
I know it's about Homecoming and Odysseus and the Odyssey.
It is indeed.
Look forward to it.
Well, you're very kind.
Jonathan Shea, this is sort of the Trojan War, Vietnam War connection.
That's right.
If I've contributed anything to the classicists, it's to insist that they do pay attention to the obvious.
And that is that the Iliad really is about war and what matters to soldiers.
That's a very heartening lesson and very true.
Jonathan, thank you very, very much.
We should talk about your book, Achilles in Vietnam.
I'm very, very pleased that you called in.
Anytime.
Good.
Thank you.
Bye-bye.
1-800-423-8255.
Patrick is calling from Cambridge.
Yes, I'm grateful for a new translation.
I've been nurturing Ryu's for many years.
But I wanted to point out two things.
Beneath the surface of this wondrous story is condensed history, as Schleiman proved when he discovered Troy by following Homer's descriptions of the place.
And I think there's also some condensed history
When Odysseus comes over and gets the Cyclops drunk for the first time, I think that's the first recorded history of Europeans, if you will, getting the American Indians drunk.
Because he found the land of the Cyclops after crossing the Atlantic, Homer's River of Ocean.
And I think there are many other hidden pieces of condensed history that have yet to be discovered.
But I'd also like to point out that there's also a wondrous symbolic language that's going on underneath.
And Campbell, in Occidental mythology, just in reference to your earlier wonderful reading of the juicy poking out of the Cyclops' eye, Joseph Campbell interprets Odysseus
Not as having speared the eye, but as having symbolically penetrated it.
You'll remember he becomes no man to prepare for a passage to the yonder world.
He loses his ego.
And then, to quote Campbell, then Odysseus passed the cosmic threshold guardian to enter a sphere of transpersonal forces.
over which ego has no control.
That's very interesting, but one kind of reply you might give is that when Odysseus is no man or nobody, he is most himself.
In other words, he uses that disguise of being no one at all in order to assert himself, to win the day against the monster.
The strange combination of anonymity on the one hand,
and self-assertion on the other, I think.
But in any of the mystic traditions, loss of ego is really a precursor, an absolute necessity for any kind of a transcendent experience.
That's very true.
I would only argue that Odysseus never loses his ego.
When he says, I am no man, Nemo, how do you translate that?
It's Utis, or Metis.
And here's where you cannot translate.
Matis means nobody.
It also sounds exactly like the word matis, which means cunning.
When he is most nobody, he is exercising his cunning most effectively.
He is matis, no one.
He is also the personification of matis, cunning, craft, deviousness.
Interesting.
This is how a translator works.
1-800-423-8255.
Peter.
He's calling from Cambridge.
Yes, I was a little bit alarmed when he said that there's been an outburst of a new translation, which I think gives a short shrift to both Fitzgerald and Latimer.
translation.
You're absolutely right.
I also think readers looking for God might do worse than look at B.S.
Karn-Ross's essay, Which Homer Do You Prefer?
Yes.
Which came out in the locally produced Aryan some years ago.
Yes, right.
Peter, give us the short form of that essay.
Well, that essay appeared, it was simply a review of
translations.
I think on the whole he came out in favor of the Fitzgerald other scenes.
went, there was some sort of a toss-up between Fitzgerald and Lattimore.
There were different things that favored each, but I mean, there's the Mandelbaum, there are a number of them.
For my money, I still prefer the Fitzgerald, but this has to do both with poetry, whether one prefers a patrician language to
and accuracy.
These all must be kept in mind.
People simply shouldn't just select, you know, say, I'm going to go out and buy the Odyssey, but be careful about the version they get.
That's a very healthy warning.
Yeah, Peter, it's a good point.
Fitzgerald is a great translation.
I think I wonder, Robert Fagos, people talk about the musicality of your language, and I think they're right.
They also
Ian McKellen talks about the performability of it.
I mean, it's just made for acting.
What was your goal?
What did you want people to say about your language?
I think I'd like them to say a variety of things, if I could.
I'd like to be able to come a little closer to those qualities that Matthew Arnold found in Homer in the first place.
Speed, directness, simplicity, and whether nobility or not, that's another matter.
I'd like the poem to be as dramatic as possible.
The Odyssey's 70% direct discourse in many parts can be literated and dramatized and put right on stage.
I'd like it to convey the enormous range of experience, pounds quotation again, where you can get it all.
And I'd like there to be some weave of voices such that you can recognize a similar but not identical voice running through the Iliad and the Odyssey.
Those are some things I'd like to do, but I remember Eliot's line, um,
For us, there is only the trying.
The rest is not our business.
1-800-423-8255, the Odyssey connection with Robert Pagels this hour.
Michael is calling from Bedford, New Hampshire.
Good morning.
Morning, my morning.
Professor, I'm just interested in how you treat the music in the theater of Odysseus, stringing the bow and plucking the bows for the string of the bow.
Well, it's one of the great moments.
Do you mean how do I translate it?
Correct.
Is there time to read, Chris?
Yeah, I think there is.
We ought to ask you to read it.
I'd love to.
This is in book 23.
It's the end of book 21, and it's about what you might call the archery of song, because Odysseus as a storyteller, a harper, at the same time Odysseus as a soldier and a great archer, come together.
Odysseus, mastermind in action, once he'd handled the great bow and scanned every inch,
Then, like an expert singer, skilled at lyre and song, whom strains the string to a new peg with ease, making the fly and sheepgut fast at either end, so with his virtuoso ease Odysseus strung his mighty bow.
Quickly his right hand plucked the string to test its pitch, and under his touch it sang out clear and sharp as a swallow's cry.
Horrors swept through the suitors, faces blanching fiber.
And Zeus cracked the sky with a bolt, his blazing sign.
And the great man who had borne so much rejoiced at last that the son of cunning Cronus flung that omen down for him.
He snatched a winged arrow lying there on the board.
The rest still bristled deep inside the quiver, soon to be tasted by all the feasters there.
Setting shaft on the hand grip, drawing the notch and bowstring back, back,
Right from his stool, just as he sat but aiming straight and true, he let fly.
And never missing an axe from the first axe-handle, clean on through to the last and out, the shaft, with its weighted brazen head, shot free.
Do you want to finish it?
I'd love to.
Please.
My son, Odysseus looked at Polemachus and said, your guest, sitting here in your house, has not disgraced you.
No missing the mark, look, and no long labor spent to string the bow.
My strength's not broken yet, not quite so frail as the mocking suitors thought.
But the hour has come to serve our master's right, supper in broad daylight.
Then to other revels, song and dancing, all that crowns a feast.
He paused with a warning nod, and at that sign, Prince Telemachus, son of King Odysseus,
girding his sharp sword on, clamping hand to spear, took his stand by a chair that flanked his father, his bronze spear point, glinting now like fire.
The end is near for the suitors.
Father and son are about to lay waste.
The next chapter is called Slaughter in the Hall.
We won't get to it this hour.
Can we get one more call from Harry in Wayland, Massachusetts?
Good morning, Harry.
Good morning.
Marvelous program.
One of the things that I'd be very interested in knowing about is the Iliad from the Odyssey can both be read as the glories of war or the horrors of war.
And I'd be very much interested in comments on that.
I think what I'd like to say about that is something that I believe Tim O'Brien, that fine war writer and human writer, once said, that the great war stories are really not about war.
They're about war as a metaphor for immortality, and I think that is really the genius of the Iliad and certainly the genius of the Odyssey, that that violence, that unspeakable violence, has a great deal to do with human frailty and human ambition, and they apply equally to men and women.
I think of the Iliad, as I say, less as a story of war than as a story of mortality.
Thank you, Harry.
You were speaking about writing it as a drama.
I wonder, to come back to a little bit of a mischievous theme about casting these parts, do you think of it as a screenplay?
Would you like to see it as a television series when we speak about a classic revival in the culture and this awareness that this story underlies every travel story, every sort of self-discovery on the road story, every Star Trek, all the exploration
history really of the last millennium would you want to see it made a very popular
thing again this may sound like self-interest but i could only answer very much uh but beyond self-interest i think it has all of those dramatic possibilities you're talking about all those cinematographic possibilities uh for changes of locale for for great heights and great depths i think it's a perfect natural i think it can be adapted to any one of a number of media but i think too
that a visual medium would just be a natural.
And as I say, there are whole scenes in Homer's Odyssey that can be simply placed upon the stage or placed within the hands of a skillful filmmaker.
And I'd like to see him or her do that job beautifully.
So would we.
I hope Hollywood is calling.
A lot of great work.
And certainly, well, we don't need another water world.
We do need, it would be great to have a definitive,
Odyssey on the screen, and the screenplay is right here.
Robert Fagels, thank you enormously for this book and for this work, a lifetime of learning and devotion.
Thanks also to our friend Bernard Knox, who writes the introduction, a great teacher and a great writer.
Yes, yours as well as mine.
Yeah, absolutely.
Should we tell folks again about the reading tonight with Jason Robards at the Agassi Theater on their old Radcliffe campus?
just outside Harvard Square at 8 o'clock tonight.
Thank you again.
We had help today from Glenn Alexander, Mark Navin,